---
title: listening, jul-dec '19
description: 'Lovely records from the second half of 2019.'
date: '2019-12-15'
slug: listening-jul-to-dec-19
tags: ['listening']
image: '/img/listening/arthur.jpg'
draft: no
---

Here is a list of stuff I was listening to in the last half of 2k19 that brought
me joy. Check the [buymusic](https://buymusic.club/) list down below to pick up
the ones available on Bandcamp. and directly support the artists. Then, go peep
some
[choice cuts from the first half of the year](https://ewen.io/2019/06/20/listening-jan-to-jun-19/),
too :]

_Existential_ by **AceMo** _[Self-released]_ - Dude has not been playing around,
insane output this year (along w/ serial collaborator MoMA Ready). Raw,
spiritual Hi-Tech Jazz.

_Delusions_ by **Akiko Haruna** _[Where To Now?]_ - Deranged made vibey,
somehow. The perfect dancefloor confuser.

_Hooch!_ by **An-i, Anklepants, Epsilove & Ohlandy, Alexander Arpeggio & Marlene
Stark, Umlaut!, Franz Scala** _[Sameheads]_ - A proper mish mash of oddball jams
from the Berlin crew. Umlaut!'s _Soap_ is a percy, after-hours karaoke feels.

_Fanfara!_ by **DJ Marcelle/Another Nice Mess** _[Laura Lies In]_ - Marcelle
goes deep and lovely, don't know how I missed her stuff until now but so so
happy I found it (+ her [ace site](http://www.anothernicemess.com/index.html).

_Cartas Na Manga_ by **DJ Nigga Fox** _[Príncipe]_ - All the percussive
gymnastics we've come to love, with plenty of surprises and new ideas from a
Lisbon legend.

_Back to the Beginning_ by **DJ Phil** _[Night Slugs]_ - Ecstatic, 160
glitter-bomb of a 12". RIP DJ Rashad 4eva.

_MAGDALENE_ by **FKA Twigs** _[Young Turks]_ - A break-up record with Nico Jaar
on the buttons? So nice to have Twigs back.

_4 Letter Word_ by **Flørist** _[The Trilogy Tapes]_ - All the way dubbed out,
immersive heaters!

_Music X Road_ by **Headie One** _[Relentless Records]_ - Up there with
_Drillers X Trappers_ for me. Another big look for Mr. One.

_XYZ_ by **Iglooghost, Kai Whiston & BABii** _[Gloo]_ - Wonky bubblegum flavours
from the future to make you smile (and feel dizzy).

_Jay Mita and Sisso meet the Modern Institute at the Villa_ by **Jay Mitta,
Modern Institute, Sisso, Errorsmith** _[Nyege Nyege Tapes]_

_GRIME MC_ by **Jme** _[Boy Better Know]_ - A victory lap for a national
treasure, you'll have to work a bit harder than normal to find this one...

_5GTOUR_ by **John T. Gast** _[Self-released]_ - Made on a tablet on a plane,
appaz.

_Slipping_ by **Joy O** _[Hinge Finger]_ - Probably Pete's most expansive and
stylistically diverse work yet. Feels immediately personal and intimate, without
sacrificing dancefloor sensibilities.

_Lifetime_ by **Klein** _[Ijn Inc.]_ - Singular incarnations of black expressive
styles, not for the faint-hearted.

_and departt from mono games_ by **LOFT** _[Self-released]_ - Fascinating
jungle-ish, techno-ish club excursions from a well exciting new artist.

_For You And I_ by **Loraine James** _[Hyperdub]_ - Can't remember a debut
record that stopped me in my tracks like this one. Essential listening
front-to-back.

_Dropped Out Sunshine_ by **Madteo** _[DDS]_ - It's your boy Madteo flippin'
Drake and paying homage to ODB, some switch-up from the last full-length _Noi
No_ (on Sakho, a good six years back now!).

_Analog Fluids Of Sonic Black Holes_ by **Moor Mother** _[Don Giovanni]_
Devastating, explosive protest behemoths from Philly musician and poet Camae
Ayewa.

_Rogue Intruder, Soul Enhancer_ by **Oli XL** _[Bloom]_ - Super sharp and
promising debut album with lots of warmth and humour.

_Movimiento Para Cambio_ by **Pelada** _[PAN]_ - Meaningful and important club
anthems out of Montreal, made to "inspire critical self- reflexivity through
engagement, building power, demanding space and action".

_Eve_ by **Rapsody** _[Roc Nation]_ - Another powerful and moving account of the
world according to Rapsody, paying all respects due to amazing black women. Even
manages to outshine J Cole on one joint...

_OIL OF EVERY PEARL'S UN-INSIDES Remix Album_ by **SOPHIE** _[Transgressive
Records]_ - Exhilarating, mesmerising, intoxicating slalom through endlessly
inventive twists on last year's LP.

_Parada_ by **Serpente** _[ECSTATIC]_ - More Lisbon drums, this time a nod to
Prince's _Parade_ LP. Utterly hypnotic.

_Ibiza Redux_ by **Special Occasion** _[Jolly Discs]_ - Cute and unassuming
earworms, I could have picked anything out of Jolly Discs this year tbh.

_VORTEX_ by **Special Request** _[Houndstooth]_ - Woolford was not playing
around with this one, to be played LOUD with friends.

_~~~_

<iframe src="https://buymusic.club/embed/ewen-listening-jul-dec-19" height="500" width="100%" frameborder="0"></iframe>
