---
title: 'From bell hooks to Barbie'
description:
date: 2023-08-02
draft: true
tags: ['feminism', 'film']
---

I read my first bell hooks book, _The Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and
Love_, earlier this year. It's verging on embarrassing to admit as a man
approaching middle age, but my internal feminist logic before this study was
back-of-a-fag-packet, hr-diversity-and-inclusion-seminar level stuff. I enjoyed
the
[MORE üëè WOMEN üëè DRONE PILOTS üëè meme](https://knowyourmeme.com/photos/1353985-hire-more-women-guards)
and nodded along when podcasts would deliver "respect women" platitudes when
detailing Megan Thee Stallion being shot. On occasion, I may have felt comforted
by sincerely thinking to myself: _I'm an ally._ Proper courageous, important
work, innit.

I'm def in dicey "reads bell hooks once" // "33YO white man REACTS to bell hooks
for the first time!" territory here but as a Geezer sat squarely in the middle
of the millennial age bracket, reading this book taught me:

- the extent to which your own spiritual suffering is promised under patriarchy
- how matriarchal thinking has it's own toxic domination logic
- the importance of solidarity between cisgender men and women to dismantle
  patriarchal forms
- that spiritual healing and nurturing of men is possible, and possible, within
  a radical feminist vision

I have to credit [Jaded Forum](https://jaded.site/forum) with first putting me
on, really, to how the patriarchy hurts men. Reading hooks' pen made me count,
and sit with, all of the ways. I used to frame my upbringing in a single-parent,
all-female household in a way that granted me immunity from the _all men are
bastards_ (AMAB) discourse and from falling into anti-feminist actions. Off the
bat, I simply wasn't "raised by women" - I had a semi-present (and later fully
present) dad and, for long stretches, another man lived in my house with me. I
knew other kids who had their own dads, then formed male friendship groups that
spanned different ages. These contexts conditioned me into

{{< youtube CKmf5_EOdck >}}

My first stable, short-lived job out of university was a recruitment consultant
in Nottingham on 16k a year (and if you're thinking I got juicy commissions,
unfortunately I was shit at all elements of this profession). I worked in a very
small (~10 ppl) office that was almost exclusively women. Very progressive and
cool, I thought! As it turns out, the familiar tools of domination wielded over
my precarious employment contract were rolled out with absolutely no bother. I
was targeted on the number of cold calls I was making every day, given the
dreaded personal development plan (AKA we want to sack you, nice and legally)
and taught how to skim money off the top of our contractors via umbrella
companies. The floor had an ultra-competitive tension simmering that frequently
bubbled over into confrontation and hostility. On reflection, this matriarchy
didn't create a healthy workplace by osmosis, it was giving trauma and
disciplinary measures. To make it absolutely clear - on a personal level, I
rated almost everyone in the building. I rate recruitment as a realistic avenue
for working class, often non-graduates to eventually make a good living. My
observation was that a traditionally hierarchical, hustle culture reasserted
it's exploitative and money-obsessed practices around women who had learnt from
the patriarchs that came before them.

I want to process my thoughts on _Barbie_ while they're hot.
