---
title: 'on shenmue'
description: ''
date: 2022-11-20
draft: false
tags: ['video-games']
images:
  - https://ewen.io/on-shenmue/xxx
---

![]()

Being a one-time Dreamcast kid feels almost too achingly hipster to believe
today, at my big age. No word of a lie, I haven't met anyone else who went home
to that silly, loveable (and surprisingly lightweight) cube. As a cultural
artefact it perfectly embodies the pre-millenium optimism that every early 90s
baby remembers being in the air those times. In the same breath as the iPod, 9
PM (Till I Come), New Labour, these relics formed a naive tapestry of utopian
possible futures. Sega really went and launched a console with internet
capabilities in 1998, a time when most of us had to convince mum to unplug the
phone so we could get half hour on MSN messenger, along with a controller that
housed a virtual pet inside it. The Dreamcast was the byproduct of an idyllic,
often hubristic time of Things Can Only Get Better type vibes.

My whirwhind Dreamcast romance feels oddly personal, because it lived in my
dad's house. I didn't have any friends where my dad lived, so when I played it I
was almost always on my ones. I had never owned previous-gen Sega consoles, so
my reference points were limited to the odd turn of Sonic or XXX at mate's
houses. The fact that so much of it's functionality was beyond my own (and my
dad's) comprehension gave it a mystical appeal, like a premonition of the
wonders the new millenium was to bring. Because I didn't get to play it much, I
tended to rent out games (maybe the most accurate prelude to the future we ended
up with - rentier capitalism) for a night or two. The time-boxed nature of the
video game rental lent itself to intense, transfixed play sessions that I have
trouble filing away as "good" memories. The game usually had to be returned the
next day, when I would then be returned to my mum's house too. I can't imagine
that these kinds of weekends were the ones my dad most enjoyed spending with me,
and I think I intuitively understood this as I returned the Dreamcast game jewel
cases into Bishops Stortford Blockbuster's post box.

Returning to Shenmue this past month, after 20+ years, was a chance to revisit
one such game that I had memorable dalliances with during this time. Shenmue was
developed and published by Sega for the Dreamcast in 1999 (but it came to the UK
in 2000) and "remastered" for the PS4 in 2019. It was created, produced and
directed by Yu Suzuki of Virtua Fighter and Outrun fame. The development cost
was unprecedented in it's time, holding the production budget record ($70
million) for 9(!) years until GTA IV ($100 million) was released in 2008. Ironic
that basically everyone I know played and gawped at GTA IV, but if I brought up
Shenmue in the same rooms there would usually be crickets. Unfortunately,
groundbreaking technical feats like this are really difficult to appreciate
later ("you had to be there", basically). If you show someone Blade Runner
today, they will probably enjoy the film but think that the special effects are
goofy. When I first trapsed around Shenmue's Dobuita district and realised I
could go into the arcade to play other Yu Suzuki games, or phone someone up
(with tinny voice acting, not Simlish or whatever), or collect toys from gacha
machines, something felt different. This was a level of immersion and simulation
that made every other game world before it (and after it, for a little while)
seem shallow.

![]()

Shenmue is talked up as the first "open city" game ever made (the title for
first "open world" game might go to an early DMA Design effort for the N64, Body
Harvest, which I also rented). I don't really know how much meaning I ascribe to
this term but I can talk about what "living" inside Shenmue feels like. You play
as Ryo Hazuki, living in the city of Yokosuka (where Yu Suzuki grew up). Your
alarm clock goes off each morning, then you get on with your day as you please.
You carry around a notebook that tracks progress through the main story, but for
most of the game you can engage with the critical path pretty loosely. As you
familiarise yourself with the streets of Shenmue, not only do you begin to see
familiar faces, you learn their routines. <insert story>. When you're not
badgering citizens with scatter-brained detective work, you ask them normal
things like "how's business", and they might observe that you "always look so
healthy". Despite Ryo being an awkward, generally pre-occupied soul, it's hard
not to feel warmth and comfort from these reliably dumb interactions (apart from
when people are walking around - they will fob you off with unsettling
regularity). These characters live somewhere in the neighbourhood and you can
actually go and find their homes (in a non-creepy way) because their names are
written on the post boxes. There's a US military base right next to Yokosuka IRL
so many of the in-game shops sell military surplus and the like. You can find
mementos around the Hazuki family home like family photos and playable cassette
tapes. These are touches that aren't even a given in open-world games today.
Back then, this stuff made my 10 year-old mind go bananas.

![]()

Quick-time events (QTEs) are another innovation credited to Shenmue. You know
the one, where you have to press buttons on the controller during action
sequences that play like cut scenes. I usually find these to be uninteresting
distractions and I don't really understand why they caught on. In this game they
tend to accompany scenes where Ryo is chasing someone or is in a fight indoors.
It's curious that these became a hallmark of AAA games (which Shenmue
undoubtedly is), maybe because they are just expensive and extraneous segments
that smaller studios wouldn't bother with so it has become an ongoing weird
flex. What's strange here is that the whole virtua fighter engine was
transplanted into the game, yet there actually isn't that much active fighting.
The decision to incorporate QTEs that replace potential fighting opportunities
contributes to the slower pace of the game that can feel jarring 20 years on.
Imagine The Last Of Us making you sit and wait for half of an in-game day while
you wait for the only storyline task to progress. Shenmue does this a lot and
makes me wonder if these are design choices are simply the rough edges of a
pioneering foray into environmental storytelling and a world that feels lived
in.

I haven't really talked about the story because it's pretty shit. Your in-game
dad is killed by Lan Di and you are out for revenge, basically. However, towards
the end of the mainline story you end up working down at the warehouse district
by the docks to try and get intel on the Mad Angels, a gang with links to the
big bad. Somehow, a section of the game devoted to manual labour comes out
smelling of roses. After your first day on the job, your boss tells you to come
back in the morning an hour before work starts. The alarm clock that goes off
every single in-game day dings an hour earlier, and the game fades up to a queue
of forklift trucks with Ryu bringing up the rear. Basically, you now take part
in a forklift race every day before work with your dockworker pals and receive a
different toy truck depending on your finishing position. If you're asking
yourself "why?" at this point, perhaps AAA seriousness has led you to miss the
point of great video games - they are games. Shenmue engages in trickery and
production values to imitate aspects of cinema, but it doesn't pretend for a
second that it isn't a video game. This creates charming set pieces and
encourages playfullness (you are the "player", not the "audience"!). I'm so here
for all of it.

This game remains painfully of it's time, good and bad. There's no way to
transport your brain to a time before it experienced Red Dead Redemption II or
The Last Of Us. The writing is frequently hilarious in a bad (but sort of good)
way. The charm is off the scale, though, and it's hard to overstate just how
much ground was being broken by this creation. A lot of the imaginative heavy
lifting for future open-world games was done right here and I think it had a
profound impact on me. Nice one, dad <3
